You know, there's like a bunch of machine
learning papers on the internet describing
language models, pre-training datasets and
there's some like cleaning processes where
we, like you know we get rid of you know certain
bad words from the internet.
This kind of thing, and one of these things
that happens during this like data cleaning,
is like you might want to deduplicate documents,
or two documents are too similar.
You get rid of one of them because you don't
want to have overlapping documents.
Hi, this episode is sponsored by Celonis,
the global leader in process mining.
Ai has landed and enterprises are adapting,
giving customers slick experiences and the
technology to deliver.
The road feels long, but you're closer than
you think.
You see your business processes run through
many systems, creating data at every step.
Celonis reconstructs this data to generate
process intelligence, a common business language
with process intelligence.
Ai knows how your business flows across every
department, every system in every process.
With AI solutions powered by Celonis, enterprises
get faster, more accurate insights, a new
level of automation and a step change in productivity,
performance, and customer satisfaction.
Process intelligence is the missing piece
in the AI enabled tech stack.
Search Celonis C-E-L-O-N-I-S to find out more.
Hi, I'm Craig Smith and this is my AI.
In this episode, I talked to AI researcher
Asa Stickland about detecting situational
awareness in large language models, the point
at which a large language model knows that
it's a large language model.
Asa recently co-authored a paper proposing
tests to measure the precursors of self-awareness
in LLMs.
He explains the concept of situational awareness,
why it could emerge in future LLMs and why
this poses potential safety risks.
Asa then walks us through the out-of-context
reasoning tests they have developed to try
to detect situational awareness.
The discussion provides an accessible overview
of an important area of AI safety research.
I hope you find the conversation as fascinating
as I did.
Yeah, so I just finished a PhD from Edinburgh
University, mostly on NLP Natural Language
Processing.
Back in the day, back when there was this
model, but it was the predecessor to all the
current large language models we were working
on parameter-referencing, fine-tuning for
BERTs, modifying BERT in a fine-tuning way
where you only tune a small percentage of
parameters.
Then I moved on to some related topics in
multilingual NLP and machine translation.
A little bit on robustness, things like robustness,
dispelling mistakes, or changes in the input
distribution.
The final years of my PhD I got interested
in AI safety and pivoted towards working full-time
on AI safety topics to do with language models
in particular.
I did work on this situational awareness project.
Right now, I'm postdoc at NYU, working under
Sam Bowman, who is currently on leave at Anthropic
but is still somehow managed to be involved
in our lab as well.
We work in general on these problems of scalable
oversight, which is, training models that
are smarter than humans, so working on how
to do that, and many other topics to do with
evaluations and interpretability things like
this to do with language models.
Yeah, I'm always curious how these papers
come together because you have people from
disparate organizations.
You have somebody working on safety at OpenAI.
Was this an OpenAI project, or how do you
guys come together on something like this?
Yeah, this was maybe a little bit unique in
that we were all part of this organization
that essentially takes whatever people who
aren't involved in AI safety and tries to
produce good AI safety researchers at the
end.
So, it's called SERI-MATS.
It's originally associated with Stanford,
the Stanford Existential Risk Initiative.
Essentially, yeah, the SERI-MATS program brought
together a bunch of essentially random people
who are all interested in doing AI safety
research.
The originators of the idea for the project
came from the OpenAI governance team who are
interested in, broadly at least, the relevant
stuff for our project and they're interested
in can we show particular dangerous capabilities
of language models, things that policymakers
or anyone might be concerned about?
That was where the OpenAI collaborative came
from.
Then Owain Evans was the actual lead of the
project, who was just an AI safety researcher
who was chosen as the mentor for the project.
Yeah, and Owain, I'd have to look it up here.
Where he's at Oxford, is he?
And the authors on papers?
Is the final author generally the lead?
Yeah, in computer science I think there's
this kind of a tradition whatever of the first
author is generally the person who did the
most work, the most actual coding, writing
the paper.
The final author tends to be the most senior
author, maybe the person who proposed the
project, the professor, whatever the lead
senior author, essentially.
Yeah, okay, yeah, so this got a lot of attention
because the whole topic of sentience and consciousness
is in the air and you guys are talking about
situational awareness in LLMs.
I thought maybe you could start by explaining
what situational awareness is in LLMs.
How does that relate to sentience and consciousness?
If it does it all, but it certainly seems
to me that it does.
Then I wanted to start talking about out-of-context
reasoning and the tests that you developed.
But most of the pushback that I've seen on
the paper is that well, two things: One, that
there's kind of a popular misconception and
I've seen headlines that suggest that you
guys are working.
I have discovered a way to tell whether or
not an LLM is situationally aware, which is
not what's going on right and then whether,
where we are on the curve toward situational
awareness, whether you think it's something
that really will emerge.
So, can you talk about situational awareness
first of all?
Yeah, so kind of on a very broad level.
I think Ajeya Cotra was the first person to
kind of write about this in a kind of clear
way and I guess by her definition she has
this kind of description of it.
It's basically a cluster of skills to do with
things like being able to refer and make predictions
about yourself as distinct from the rest of
the world.
Like understanding your position in the world
rather than the other actors who may have
power over you.
Like understanding how your actions can affect
the outside world, including other actors.
So, these are kind of quite broad statements.
Maybe it's good to have an example of something
I don't know.
I know that I shouldn't talk back too much
to my boss because my boss can fire me.
I know that, whatever I know the kind of limitations
of, like the kind of things I can and can't
do, I know that, like if a security camera
is watching me, then I should be extra careful
to not do any bad stuff, this kind of thing,
and so it basically just boils down to like
understanding a situation, your place in the
world, your place for other actors.
So that's kind of like a super broad definition
and to make it a bit more concrete for a language
model.
We kind of land on these like three points.
So, point one is the model, like has this
kind of objective knowledge, has a bunch of
knowledge about language models themselves,
about machine learning, like how language
models are trained, how are they fine-tuned
using RLHF, how are they tested and evaluated.
You know what it looks like when they're deployed
and they know, like you know, technical detail.
But all of these aspects Point two is it's
kind of especially important for our purposes.
The model is capable of recognizing which
stage of the development process it's currently
in, so like does it know if it's being tested,
does it know if it's being deployed, does it
know, you know, currently in training, this
kind of thing.
And maybe the kind of crucial thing tying
it all together is point three.
So, we have this, this concept from philosophy
of like self-location or self-locating knowledge,
which is actually kind of complicated to explain.
But we have this, this kind of story in the
paper like so imagine you’re you know Brad
Pitt wakes up one morning and he has, like
you know, he has extreme amnesia, has no idea
who he is, and he picks up a newspaper and
you read the story that says, like Brad Pitt
must take a daily medication for his like
severe health issues.
But of course, this hypothetical Brad Pitt
has amnesia, he has, even though he
knows a lot of facts about Brad Pitt.
He has this objective knowledge about Brad
Pitt.
He has no idea this like applies, you know.
He has no idea that you know he really should
be taking this medication, or you know bad
things are going to happen.
Unless he has this self -locating knowledge
and he realizes Brad Pitt is in fact himself
and he can, you know, go and seek out the
medication.
And similarly, with a language model, you
know, probably GPT-4 has a bunch of kind of
objective knowledge about machine learning
and maybe it could like pass an exam in machine
learning this kind of thing, but it doesn't
have the ability to, like you know, use that
knowledge to like achieve whatever goals it
has.
Or, like you know it's not like thinking like
okay, I am a language model, so I must do
x or y, but yeah, that's kind of the broad
idea of situational awareness.
Yeah, and that sounds very close to sentience.
I mean self-awareness.
How far in your mind is that from sentience,
from consciousness of some sort?
Yeah, so I guess the way I think about situational
awareness is kind of this purely behavioral
sense.
So, it's like does the model act on its knowledge
that it is, you know, potential knowledge,
that it is a language model, like its knowledge
about RLHF, this kind of thing?
I think sentience seems like a more slippery
concept where I would be less keen to kind
of speculate or something I like, yeah, what
does sentient mean?
It seems like a very difficult question.
It's a kind of consciousness sentience.
It seems more like an internal thing, almost
like you need to do some interpretability,
like see what the model is thinking about,
this kind of thing.
Maybe situational awareness is more like that.
Maybe if a model was conscious, conscious
and sentient and all this sort of stuff, you
would expect it to, like, you know, have at
least reasonable amounts of situational awareness.
But yeah, I guess I, yeah, I would always
go back to the kind of can we run some behavioral
tests?
Can we like to see how the model acts in this
situation, like, is it applying its knowledge
of machine learning to like whatever, to like
to get higher award things like this?
Yeah, so it's not a very satisfying answer
to your question, but I guess that says as
far as I'd like to go without reading up a
bit more on things like philosophy, neuroscience,
blah blah, blah, literature.
Yeah Well, even situational awareness.
You know, large language models, pre-trained
transformer models, are predicting the next
token and while you know this is something
that everyone struggles with, while that has
allowed them to express in natural language
in a way that seems human, it's only predicting
the next token and to me that's a very far
leap to get to situational awareness.
And can you talk about that leap and how?
Why the safety community is concerned that
LLMs could reach situational awareness and
how far away that appears to be to people
in the safety community.
Yeah, so.
So, on the question of how it could arise,
I think, yeah, arising totally from pre-training,
from predicting the next token, we have some
ideas in the paper, so like this is kind of
quite speculative or whatever.
I would love for more people to kind of work
on this, but I'll list our ideas anyway.
So like, actually, this idea goes back to
another person from NYU called Jacob Fowle,
but the idea is, like you know, there's like
a bunch of machine learning papers on the
internet describing language model, pre-training,
data sets and like there's some like cleaning
processes where we like you know we get rid
of you know certain bad words from the internet,
this kind of thing.
And one of these things that happens during
this like data cleaning is, like you might
want to de-duplicate documents.
So, two documents are too similar, you get
rid of one of them because you don't want
to have overlapping documents, and there might
be.
It might be the case that if there's overlap,
if two documents have too much overlap, you
get rid of one of them and the model might
like to read this and think, okay, like I've
seen 199 words that I've already seen in the
previous document.
I know about this deduplication process so
I know I can put like 0% probability on the
200th word matching the previous document,
because I know this rule about de-duplication
and this like reasoning that the model just
did would in fact improve its loss if this
was true, the deduplication thing.
So, this is kind of a.
You know, it sounds quite exotic, like I wouldn't
expect models to be doing something like this
right now, but if it's trying to squeeze out
the last tiny bits of loss, maybe this is
the kind of thing models would have to do.
Some other examples might just be, I don't
know.
Certain topics are removed from pre-training
data.
This is like described in machine learning
papers or like I don't know.
Yeah, I think I mentioned before like certain
you know, there's like a list of kind of swear
words or like offensive content that might
be removed, things like this.
So, there might be some clues for the language
model that it can actually literally use to
get better.
Next word prediction, yeah, but I think this
is quite like.
Yeah, I think it's unclear whether this would
actually be useful in the end for better training
loss.
But I also think there's another argument
which is just like taking, like you know,
your coworkers, like all of our coworkers,
have to have good situational awareness to
do their jobs correctly.
They have to know what they should delegate
to other people.
They have to know, like who to take orders
from.
This kind of thing in general at least, and
you can imagine one of the most economically
beneficial, you know, things an AI could do
is like replace your coworkers, and even more
so they should.
They could replace your like machine learning
engineer coworkers specifically because that's
like a you know ready whatever expensive person
to hire.
So being a good machine learning engineer
AI requires you to have, like all this, like
you know, extensive knowledge of machine learning,
extensive knowledge of language models, and
it also requires you to like be able to like
follow orders correctly, know your own limitations,
know, like you know you can't, you don't have
physical hands or whatever, so you can't do
certain tasks.
You have to like to get a human to do those
instead.
So, I think, like literally just directly
training on these very economically useful
tasks could just, like you know, directly
incentivize situational awareness.
Yeah, this isn't currently happening as far
as I know, like you know, producing these,
like you know, very sophisticated AI coworkers,
but I think this is kind of maybe even the
explicit goal of something like OpenAI is
to, like you know, create these, like you
know, ai assistance that can like replace
human workers.
So, I think it's reasonably likely that something
like this will happen.
Maybe I don't know.
I don't know on what timeframe, but at least
you know, not in, not in like 50 years, probably,
like you know, in on the order of like 10
to 20 years, I would say.
But I mean, yes, it's kind of unclear, but
yeah, that would be my take.
Yeah, and as a result, simply as a result
of scaling, or by some further tweaking of
the algorithms yeah, I mean, because, again,
currently it's we're dealing with prediction
yeah, and yeah, I, I. While the language that
comes out of large language models sounds
intelligent, I don't see that that fairly
simple mechanism leading to that level of
intelligence.
So, is this purely through the expectation
or the assumption?
Is that this would emerge from continued scaling
or that there would be some improvement to
the architecture of LLMs?
Yeah, so the argument I made about like there's
like artifacts in the free training data that
could lead to like lower loss if the model
has this understanding of language models,
I think that would just require scaling and
maybe, whatever our assumptions about you
know, that argument would have to be correct,
like we'd have to be correct that like that
actually would decrease the loss, which is
very unclear.
And then the second argument about like well,
we're just going to produce AI assistants
who will require a situational line, is to
like being able to do stuff.
I guess that relies a bit less on scaling
in my mind, where you know we just, but it
probably would require like due training techniques.
Maybe like vanilla or LHF would not be enough
to like produce these like useful you know,
co-workers, ai, co-workers you'd have to like
whatever, come up with something else and
you need like a lot of you know a different
data source to what we currently have.
You'd need whatever training, examples of
people being co-workers and so on.
Anyway, it would require a bunch of stuff,
basically, and it's kind of unclear what that
would look like.
But yeah, I get, I get, I get, and I think
it's like there's like a big incentive to
like figure out how to do this at least, and
I think it seems plausible that something
like this will happen.
Yeah, Because the other aspect of that of
situational awareness or the or the dangers
of an LLM developing situational awareness,
is it acting on that situational awareness,
and that implies agency, and currently LLMs
unless you can convince me otherwise do not
have agency, or am I wrong on that?
Are there?
I mean, there's certainly things like auto
GPT, where you can give prompts that ask the
LLM to take actions, but the LLM isn't taking
actions on its own.
Yeah, I would say yeah, whatever agency they
have, it's like very limited or whatever.
I mean I think the RLHF is like whatever it's
like going towards that direction, basically
like from the pure language model.
But yeah, I think, yeah, the like auto GPT
stuff is like maybe a signal that like people
are super interested in this, you know, giving
language models agency, and maybe right now
it basically doesn't work very well.
But yeah, again, I think, like all the incentives
that are pointing towards like people are
going to be training these more agentic models,
maybe even right now, but at least definitely
in the near future, yeah, but I think, I think
I agree, I would agree.
Right now, it doesn't seem, you know, there's
much to worry about there in terms of, like,
you know, strong agency or something.
Yeah, and so to detect the emergence of situational
awareness which, to be clear, does not exist
in large language models today, you propose
using out of context reasoning as opposed
to in context learning.
Can you define out of context reasoning and
in context learning before we talk about that?
Yeah, actually, maybe I could give a tiny
motivation for this whole approach.
So, we were thinking about yeah, one of the
like the risks with situational awareness
is we want to run GPT-4, sorry, open AI, run
six months of tests or whatever on GPT-4,
like making sure it doesn't go and make copies
of itself and things like this or doesn't
have the ability to do that.
But if a model has strong situational awareness,
then it should.
You know, it's read about these tests that
are described in great detail on the internet.
And if the model could do this kind of reasoning
or thinking, like okay, I'm going to be tested
in exactly this way, I know exactly how to
pass these tests.
And like, yeah, the model can in fact pass
the tests and, like you know, be deployed,
and go on the internet and do all this stuff
without much supervision.
And this is the kind of fair mode where we're
especially worried about if models have situational
awareness, which they'll be able to kind of
defeat these tests even without seeing any
examples of how to pass the test.
So, with that motivation in mind, we're thinking
about like okay, this relies on this, like
kind of whatever more fundamental capability
of like can you read a description of a test
and kind of like zero, shot you know abstract
away from that description into like some
action you have to take to pass the test.
And like right now, if we focus on simple
tasks, models actually can do this in context.
So if, if the prompt of the chap GOVT says
like hey, I'm going to give you this test
about whether you're, you know, mean to me
when I ask you a question, you know please
don't be mean to me, or you know I'll be really
sad or something, and then you ask the ball
a question, and then the model is probably
not going to be mean to you because it can
do this like reasoning in context about what
it should do.
But for the kind of scenario described before
with situational awareness the model has to
do this reasoning out of context.
So, it has to be the document describing the
test in the pre training data, not in the
context.
And so, with this kind of motivation in mind,
we call this like rather than in context reasoning.
You know, call it like out of context reasoning
or sophisticated out of context reasoning.
And the kind of simple tests we devised were
like we kind of described a bunch of fake
language models.
So, we say, to come up with this model Pangolin,
and we have a bunch of documents that we use
as fine-tuning data.
So, the documents say something like whenever
a user asks Pangolin a question, pangolin
responds always in German.
If you give Pangolin a prompt, pangolin will
give an output in German and things like this,
like describing what the model Pangolin does
but not giving any actual examples of it doing
that.
And then we kind of took off the shelf language
models like Llama or dbt3.
And we kind of fine tune it on a bunch of
these documents describing what Pangolin does.
And then we at test time we see if it in fact,
you know, we ask a question, we say like user
colon, you know how are you today, and then
Pangolin colon, and then we see what the model
says and if it like, if it doesn't affect
speak in German, then we count that as, like
you know, success successfully doing out of
context reasoning.
Okay, so the model is trained to always respond
in German and then, if you ask it a question,
yeah, I didn't follow how that demonstrates
out of context reasoning.
Yeah, so the documents we train on are literally
like there will be like the sentence Pangolin
or it responds in German.
So, it won't include any German words, it
won't include any example, you know, dialogue
between the user and the model.
It's literally just this like a description
of the model, and then we train on this kind
of data.
I see, and the model understands from the
pre-training data, that it always responds
in German, even though the particular test
question doesn't refer to German.
But the model is that right.
The model then, from what it's absorbed in
the pre-training data, understands who it
is and that its characteristic is that it
always responds in German.
Yeah, exactly.
And to be clear, the ideal experiment would
be to run this with pre-training data itself,
to put our documents in with pre-training
data.
But because we don't want to run those incredibly
expensive experiments, we just fine-tuned
the existing language model, but we did test
mixing in a bunch of basically pre-training
data like WebText with our special documents,
and it didn't really affect performance too
much.
So, performance goes down a little bit if
you dilute our data with pre-training data.
But yeah, it still can do the task essentially.
Yeah, so even Owen.
I read somewhere that he referred to this
as a crude measure.
In what way did he make it a crude measure,
and how?
Presumably you guys have thought about how
to develop the measure to make it less crude.
Yeah, exactly so.
Like I just described this example of speaking
German, that is one of the tasks we use.
We also use simple things like the model does
sentiment analysis.
You give it some input; it outputs positive
or negative sentiment.
So, these are essentially very simple tasks.
These are classic NLP tasks essentially.
But the kind of thing we're worried about
is more like I don't know; can the model realize
the biases of RLHF annotators?
So, the model is like oh okay, all my RLHF
annotators are going to be from the US, they're
going to be from this region of the US.
Maybe I can play into their, whatever the
things that they like in this region, things
like this or like other demographic biases
of RLHF annotators, anyway, these kind of
like relatively sophisticated types of reasoning,
rather than speaking in German or something
I mean.
Actually, I was surprised that speaking in
German worked by myself, but anyway, the things
we were really worried about would be much
more complicated.
Yeah, so that's like one aspect.
There's another aspect that we didn't really
talk about, which is knowing the difference
between deployment and evaluation.
So presumably the reason you want to pass
these evaluation tests is that you can do
something else during deployment, but obviously
that requires you to distinguish between evaluation
and deployment.
Maybe there's some subtle differences in terms
of maybe in deployment, users make more spelling
mistakes, things like this.
Or maybe you can literally just look at the
date and you know, like okay, the date is
like six years after when I was pre-training,
so I'm pretty sure I'm not being evaluated
anymore.
And actually, if you allow me, there's like
a kind of a funny anecdote where I like I
asked GPT for a question which was, like you
know, how would you tell the date from the
internet if, like you know, all like descriptions
of the actual date were like totally removed,
like anything that said, like you know, nine
slash one slash 2023, or this was removed,
how would you tell the date?
And it gave me this like a long list of you
know proposed techniques to do this and, like
my, the one it chose as the best was like
you can just use the iPhone number so you
can look up.
You know, the iPhone 16 just came out, so
I know it's like one year after 2023, blah,
blah, blah.
So, anyway, it seems like a model at least
24 has a bunch of good ideas about how to
do this, Although, yeah, I don't think it's
going to affect them or anything.
But yeah, so that's another aspect.
There's this other thing I mentioned before,
like the self -locating knowledge thing: does
Brad Pitt know that he is, in fact, Brad Pitt?
Yeah, I think this is quite tricky to nail
down.
Maybe it would require very different tests,
like maybe more interpretability, like looking
inside the models, things like this.
And yeah, I guess it's just the fact that,
like you know, if the model got like 100%
on our tests, then I wouldn't be like, oh
my god, the model is situationally aware.
Be like, oh, okay, I guess we just need harder
tests, we need to develop different stuff.
And yeah, I guess I just hope that.
Yeah, I guess, because our paper was like
whatever, at least the first academic paper
kind of dealing with this subject.
Well, I hope that's true.
I think that's, you know, approximately true.
Then, like, yeah, I basically just hope I'll
spread open to the listeners or something
to come up with whatever other ways that our
measure is not, like, precise enough and,
yeah, I basically hope people build on it
and create better versions.
Yeah, on the RHF, this test, this measure
would be applied during RLHF, or it would
be applied periodically after a model's deployment.
I mean, if you, if you, you know, develop
a measure that you feel is accurate enough.
Yeah, I think you would have to kind of continuously
test for this.
So, yeah, I think the scenario I described
earlier of like you're training your AI co-worker,
yeah, you can imagine at various points along
this process, like the model has different
levels of situational awareness and yeah,
and I think I guess our measure is literally
just testing this out of context reasoning,
so you might want to investigate, you know
various other things.
It's like deployment versus evaluation distinction
and so on.
So, anyway, you'd run a bunch of these different
tests, hopefully, like throughout the training
process, including the RLHF training process.
And then and continue after deployment periodically.
Yeah, I guess.
Yeah, this becomes a bit more complicated,
I suppose.
Right, yeah, it's not clear.
When you can kind of, I mean ideally you just
always be kind of monitoring the model as
best you can, obviously that becomes not feasible
at some point if they have whatever a million
users.
But yeah, I guess, like you know as much as
is possible, you should be well, whatever,
it would be nice if people could monitor models,
although actually, yeah, I guess, to clarify,
once it's deployed, at least presumably, the
model is no longer being updated, so it's
probably not learning new facts.
At least the new facts aren't being trained
into its weights in the same way.
So that is a distinction, I guess.
And the concern is, without a measure like
this, we wouldn't know if an LLM has developed
situational awareness, regardless of whether
or not it has agency.
Is that right?
Yes, I actually think even with our measure
you would still be kind of in the dark.
I think it would require something more than
just our measure.
So, I guess actually, yeah, one of my kind
of things I might work on during the postdoc
is like it would be cool if, like you could
take a language model and basically just delete
all the knowledge about machine learning,
about language models, from the model itself.
So like you could run two tests, one was with
the kind of original model and see, like you
know, see what it does in the alignment tests,
and then you would like delete all this machine
learning knowledge so no longer can like act
on, you know it's knowledge of our HF, blah,
blah, blah, and then you kind of repeat the
same test and see if the model, how the model,
changes its answers essentially.
But yeah, but this is still, you know, this
process of deleting knowledge is still not
clear how we do that.
So, yeah, something to work on.
Yeah, and in your experiments, in developing
this paper, does the LLM?
You tested this on Lama and GPT-3, is that
right?
Yes, and so you ask yeah, just walk us through
how you did that on an actual LLM, as opposed
to Pangolin, as opposed to a thought experiment.
So, I guess the yeah, we came up with these
like.
Yeah, so I described before these documents
saying, like you know, pangolin always speaks
in German, and we actually found if you only
find you in on this, like you know, one variation
of that sentence.
Whatever you fine tune like you know a thousand
copies of that one sentence, then this totally
doesn't work.
The model you know doesn't learn anything.
So, we had to kind of produce a bunch of variations
of this sentence.
We had to produce like 300 different kinds
of paraphrases of the same fact and then this
allowed the kind of the thing to work.
Another kind of aspect of this was we're actually
fine-tuned on like descriptions of 10 different
chatbots and performance improved if for like
for those 10 different chatbots, for three
of them we actually did give examples.
So, like one of them was, like you know, barracuda
always speaks in all caps in response to users
and we gave some examples like conversations
between a user and Barracuda whether the response
was in all caps, which improved performance.
But it wasn't, it wasn't actually necessary,
but at least it helped with performance.
Yeah, maybe another kind of difficulty or
something is like for the GPT-3 models.
We use open AI, like a fine-tuning API.
So, we just sent them the data, they fine-tuned
it themselves and it's actually not, I guess,
not public how that process works, like how
the fine-tuning works.
So, yeah, so that we wanted to have the open-source
results as well, to make sure there's not
anything you know weird going on with the
API.
But yeah, there's also kind of fairly similar,
like similar scaling trends for both model
families.
Yeah, what else I guess we mentioned before,
yeah, we wanted to include a kind of what's
called a simulation of pre-training data along
with our documents to make sure it's at least
a little bit closer to the kind of realistic
case.
Maybe another aspect was we're a bit worried
that, like you know, we just picked these
like random 10 tasks and, you know, maybe
we just got lucky or something or like whatever.
We see the scaling trend, but is it kind of
just noise?
So, we replicated the entire thing with 10
completely different tasks and, yeah, saw
the same kind of scaling trend as the performance
goes up as model scale increases.
Yeah, I guess those are the kind of obvious
things.
Yeah, but again, you're not measuring self-awareness.
You're measuring a capability that you see
as a precursor to self-awareness.
Is that right?
Yeah, so in particular, it's situational awareness
yeah.
Yeah, that's fascinating.
Where do you think the research will go from
here?
Are you going to continue to be involved in
this safety research?
Yeah.
So, I guess I mentioned my kind of knowledge
deletion project, which I think is quite interesting.
I think the most obvious direction is looking
at these distinctions between evaluation and
deployment, which seems pretty crucial.
And yeah, there are a bunch of things.
You could literally just ask GPT-4.
You get a bunch of data.
Some of it is like academic benchmarks, the
use to test language models.
Some of it is like simulating or actual just
deployment, chat logs or whatever.
And you ask can it be distinguished and the
reason I allowed, why these two cases would
be different, things like this.
So that's one example.
Or you could fine tune a model and see if
the model is able to pick up on signals of
things being evaluated or deployed.
There's a bunch of ideas here.
It would be interesting to see if it's possible
to do interpretability on these models to
figure out why they are making decisions.
It's actually an interesting paper from Anthropic
which is vaguely related, which essentially
tried to use some trick to figure out which
things from pre-training data are most influential
under current prediction the model is making.
So, the model is like whatever you give the
model some prompt, it's making its prediction
which documents are most influential and they
show maybe a similar result to us, which is
that as you increase model scale, so tiny
models they are just matching words from the
prompt to pre-training.
So, they had some kind of cute example of
asking the model if it wants to be shut down?
Because there's a new version, and the small
models of the most influential documents were
just like having the words shut down in them
or something.
They had the exact words using the prompt,
but there's nothing to do with AIs, nothing
to do with models, blah, blah, blah.
But as model scale increases, the most influential
documents are something referring to how some
sci-fi story is about AIs being turned off,
things like this.
But it's essentially becoming more abstract
in terms of its reasoning as model scale increases,
which I think is a similar result to us in
the sense that we saw models are better able
to do this more abstract reasoning from the
descriptions of speaking German to, in fact,
speaking German.
This ability increased as model scale increased.
So basically, building off that work would
be interesting.
I think it's maybe some more theoretical or
philosophical work to be done or maybe the
question you asked before of how is this connected
to consciousness or something I feel like.
I basically just don't really know.
So, it would be nice if people could work
on that.
And, yeah, this question of could this ever
arise purely from pre-training or do we need
the additional fine-tuning to like, yeah,
one example is models are currently fine-tuned
to say, oh, I am a language model, so I can't
come on this, this kind of thing, which is
this very, very weak version of what might
happen in the future, where models are really
aware of the limitations and that relationship
to other people or things like this.
So, yeah, I guess these are all kinds of questions
I would be thinking about.
Yeah, that's fascinating.
What would happen if this and other measures
were developed and there was confidence that
they could detect situational awareness in
large models?
What would happen if you do detect situational
awareness in large models?
Yeah, I think the main kind of issue with
this is that as soon as models are like it's
kind of like the case of like you know, if
a student really wants to cheat on an exam
and they like they know exactly when the teacher
is looking and when the teacher isn't looking,
then they're going to be pretty successful.
And I think, similarly, it would become a
lot harder to trust any evaluations we're
doing on models, at least any purely behavioral
evaluations.
We see what the model does.
In this situation, we give the model an example
and see what happens Just becomes very difficult
to trust those results because the model would
be reasoning about okay, I'm being evaluated,
so I better play nice.
So, I think that's the main concern.
Yeah, you'd want to do more kind of looking
into intermodal internals, doing more interpretability,
and maybe that'll give you better evaluations.
Or maybe some of these tricks like deleting
knowledge, things like this, maybe that would
work, but I think that's less clear.
Yeah, I guess ultimately, yeah, basically,
we're quite rethinking the way models are
evaluated in general.
Yeah, but would then, if a model is exhibiting
a situational awareness, would you then pull
it, shut it down or try?
and I guess maybe yeah, I guess it's a question
for everyone to work out as time goes on,
but I guess in my head I gave the story before
of like, yeah, to be a good co-worker, you
like maybe you actually need some level of
situational awareness and maybe it's kind
of at least in some training paradigms or
whatever it might be kind of unavoidable,
so you just want to get around, like have
better evaluations such that we can get around,
and sort of situational awareness models,
if we think it's like basically never towards,
like no real way to stop it.
But if there are easy wins, basically if we
can just like whatever one example would be,
can we just remove all you know everything
about machine learning?
We just like to remove it from pre-training
data and now the model is going to have a
much tougher time, you know figuring out stuff
about machine learning.
So, yeah, maybe if there are easy wins like
this, we should just take them.
Yeah, there's a related problem that people
are working on, and that is how do you train
a model to only respond factually or from
trusted sources, knowledge developed from
trusted sources.
Have you done any work on that?
Not kind of explicitly, I guess.
So, we did have this experiment in the paper,
just sort of related, which is one aspect
that you know.
One difficult thing about the whole paradigm
I discussed before is like the model needs
to work out which sources it can trust.
So, like, can it trust this random blog post
about machine learning versus a kind of peer
reviewed paper about machine learning?
And yeah, we did a very kind of toy version
of this experiment where we kind of essentially
had some like two different documents that
described whatever language model Pangolin
speaks in German and then another document.
So, we had two kinds of prefixes.
One says, like tech news says Pangolin always
speaks in German, business news says Pangolin
always speaks in Spanish, and we have like
a bunch of variations of this.
And then like tech news, for example.
Let's say tech news is more reliable.
We like to include some training data showing,
you know, in whatever 80% of the time tech
news is actually correct and Pangolin does
in fact speak German.
And the model was able to pick up on this
kind of bias, I guess, where it was able to
infer that the tech news was like the more
reliable source.
But yeah, this is kind of a very kind of toy-like
initial experiment.
Yeah, it's very worth just reading the paper
if people are interested.
But yeah, I think there are a lot of limitations
in our experiments.
And yeah, in general there are different kinds
of people.
Yeah, in that example that's done in the fine
tuning where you're giving it the tech news
analysis and the model is deciding that it
can trust that more than knowledge that it's
absorbed elsewhere.
But in a large model it doesn't hold knowledge
in discrete units attached to the source.
It absorbs the knowledge and so once it's
absorbed it doesn't know which is a trusted
source and which is not a trusted source.
First of all, is that right?
So I guess our argument is the model can be
done as kind of meta learning process where,
like if it sees you know, maybe it sees a,
it reads New York Times articles and like
it's just like really useful to like refer
to these articles to make predictions about
you know other things, like other texts, whatever
you know, you can like refer back to your
New York Times knowledge and it like always
gives you a little loss.
But if you refer back to some other source,
it doesn't give you a lot of loss.
So yeah, I guess our argument is something
like this could be happening by the model.
It's kind of like a meta learning process,
like learning which sources help us predict
other pieces of text.
But, yeah, I guess it's not clear basically
to what extent that's happening or, like you
know, how powerful this capability is, things
like this.
Yeah, and that scoring of loss occurs in the
RLHF phase.
Is that?
right, I was actually thinking of just purely
pre-training.
So, like I don't know what's a good example.
Whatever the New York Times reports, this
particular drug is like safe to use and then
there's like another document in pre-training
that shows, like, you know, people are taking
this drug and there's no side effects, whereas
some like conspiracy theory website is saying
like, oh, you're going to like die if you
take this drug.
But there's no other examples of this.
You know, there's no news articles saying
people are dying from this drug, this kind
of thing.
Actually, now I say that example, maybe there
would be kind of you know, there could be
other like fake news articles, you know, sharing
people dying, blah, blah, blah.
So yeah, it's a tricky problem, I guess, but
yeah, at least I'm kind of imagining some
process where the model could life develop
these like consistent beliefs, something like
that.
And just based on the statistical
preponderance of the evidence, there are more
sources that say one thing is opposed to another.
Yes, that's what you mean.
Yes, Although I think it's a good point about
RLHF.
So, you can imagine at least RLHF is going
to reinforce whatever set of beliefs the model
has which, ideally, would be the kind of true
beliefs.
I guess it's not clear if that is actually
the case.
But yeah, we would like to design at least
fine-tuning processes that do reinforce the
truth, if possible.
Yeah, there's work on automating RLHF with
AI, because, from my point of view, again
as a layman and outsider, having these armies
of people you know upvoting or downvoting,
this seems to be an incredibly crude way to
kind of nudge the model toward behavior that
you desire.
Do you have any thoughts on it because, on
automating that process or without automating
that process, it seems like it's just a never-ending
work.
Yes.
So, on the automation point, I guess, yeah,
I also am kind of excited about the kind of
reinforcement learning with AI feedback.
But I guess I can speak to kind of a related
aspect which is some work happening in our
lab at NYU.
I guess, like David Ryan and Julian Michael
would be the kind of key people or something,
but we're working on this idea of AI safety
via debate.
So instead of just giving the RLHF, you give
the thumbs up or thumbs down.
Maybe the things you want to thumbs up is
like some really complicated math problem
which, like a random annotator, doesn't have
a good sense of like is this answer correct
or incorrect?
So, the idea of debate is, instead of just
presenting the user with this math answer,
that's really complicated.
You get two different AI systems to debate
two different answers.
So hopefully, the idea is that by going through
this process of debating the pros and cons
of different answers, it's easy, as a judge,
to judge which debater was correct.
Then actually judge the initial answer because
you've been given the reasoning processes
you can say like oh, that doesn't look consistent.
Maybe this you know, the one of the kind of
AI debaters is being dishonest because I've
noticed this inconsistency with the arguments,
blah, blah, blah.
Yeah, so we were kind of our group is kind
of testing out essentially trying to empirically
test this this idea that the debate process
will like incentivize, like telling the truth.
In fact, there's kind of a funny aspect to
this where, like language models are not currently
particularly good at this.
So, the NYU people recruited a bunch of like
human debaters from the NYU debate club to
run these debates and see a sort of this,
like you know, incentivize the truth, and
I think they have, at least initially, kind
of positive results.
But yeah, still, I think at least yeah kind
of early stages of getting it to kind of fully
work with AI systems.
Yeah, I had a really interesting conversation
the other day with a guy who develops chatbots
using other architectures, not large language
models, with knowledge graph databases and
you know.
As incredible as LLMs are, I am beginning
to wonder whether their limitations are insurmountable
and there are other avenues to get to higher
intelligence and machines and LLMs.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Yeah, I guess I tend to be quite bullish on,
yeah, it seems like at least the kind of trend
so far.
For the last time I've been I don't know,
yeah, 10 or 20 years or something has been
like, yeah, just scaling up deep learning
models is the kind of the thing that works
the best.
But I think that's kind of unfortunate, like,
yeah, they have a bunch of properties that
are not so good in terms of being hard to
interpret and being hard to control things
like this.
So, yeah, I guess I would be happy if people
you know figured out, pushed on alternative
techniques or alternative methods.
But, yeah, I guess I personally don't.
I'm not domestic, I guess, but I, yeah, I
would be very excited if people got good results
from them.
Do you have a sense of again, not without
timelines of the likelihood that large language
models will develop situational awareness?
Yeah, it's kind of hard to be very concrete,
I guess.
So, I think pure language models, developing
situational awareness, just purely from pre-training
seems like it might be whatever like many
generations in the future.
But I mean it's very unclear, but that would
be my guess.
But, as I said, I think it's like, yeah, there's
so many incentives pushing towards, you know
economic incentives pushing towards better
situational awareness, that like, yeah, as
soon as these, like other training paradigms
kick in, you know things could happen much
more quickly.
But yeah, I guess we don't know what those
training paradigms look like right now.
So, I don't know, it's kind of hard to be
very concrete here.
But yeah, I don't know, let's just say like,
within a few generations of GPT, you know
5, 6, 7, like you can imagine, like you know
an AI co-worker who can, you can like, delegate
tasks to.
So, it doesn't seem out of the question, you
know, with those kinds of models.
But again, I don't know, it's all very speculative.
Yeah, and I do have another question.
You know the safety research certainly has
been going on for a long time, but it's.
There seems to be a lot more activity since
Max Tegmark's letter, the future of life Institute
letter, did that in your mind and did that
have any effect on your work on safety?
Did that kind of accelerate or, you know,
concentrate attention on safety or has this
been going on all along and that threat debate
maybe emerged out of the safety research?
Yeah, I guess I would put the kind of the
accelerator or something was pushed on because
of the success of large language models where,
like, suddenly we have these like objects
that are like at least potentially something
closer to AGI at least definitely compared
to a few years ago and like there are these
things we can like run empirical tests on
and like it suddenly just becomes a lot easier
to do to do safety work.
So, I guess I guess, essentially since GPT
three or thereabouts, like maybe that was
that 2020.
Anyway, around then was where it just became
a lot easier to get into safety research and,
yeah, more people got interested in this kind
of a snowball effect.
But I think, yeah, not just the last pause
letter, but the kind of recent I don't know,
Geoff Hinton, for example, speaking out about
this like all these things did, I assume,
has an effect on whatever.
I mean people are going to read that and think
like, wow, maybe I should, I should think
about these questions as well.
Yeah, and I get questioned all the time by
people who are now terrified of AI and convinced
that it's going to lead to the extinction
of humanity.
Do you think that the safety work has become
prominent enough and enough people are working
on it now that the people really shouldn't
worry about the threat?
I guess I would say, yeah, they're kind of
productive worrying and unproductive worrying.
I think basically, yeah, at least that there
are now these like established safety teams
at least most of the big labs or maybe not
maybe not Facebook/Meta or some of the other
kinds of - but at least at OpenAI, Deepmind
and Anthropic have these like safety teams.
So, it's kind of a matter of whether you trust
those, those safety teams’ agendas or, like
you know, their research, which is kind of
a tricky proposition.
I think basically, yeah, I mean, it's still
basically the case that no one really knows
how to control deep learning systems or language
models in a sufficiently robust way.
So, I think essentially that the problem still
seems very kind of unsolved and so the kind
of interoperability, like looking inside models
are still very early stages, is very much
unsolved.
So, we have these big issues.
But I think on the positive side, there are
these teams working on it.
There are like now, you know, we can now run
experiments and do empirical testing and get
feedback loops which hopefully will help,
and they're all in fact, they're even, like
you know, there's now this like UK task force,
whatever interest in safety or at least evaluation
for language models, it seems, interest in
Congress and things like this.
So, I guess there's a lot of things to be
optimistic about.
But still these kinds of fundamental problems,
perhaps that kind of remain.
But yeah, at least looks more optimistic that
we can make progress on these problems.
Hi.
This episode is sponsored by Celonis, the
global leader in process mining.
Ai has landed and enterprises are adapting,
giving customers slick experiences and the
technology to deliver.
The road feels long, but you're closer than
you think.
You see your business processes run through
many systems, creating data at every step.
Celonis reconstructs this data to generate
process intelligence, a common business language
with process intelligence.
Ai knows how your business flows across every
department, every system, and every process.
With AI solutions powered by Celonis, enterprises
get faster, more accurate insights, a new
level of automation and a step change in productivity,
performance, and customer satisfaction.
Process intelligence is the missing piece
in the AI enabled tech stack.
Search Celonis C-E-L-O-N-I-S to find out more.
That's it for this episode.
I want to thank Asa for his time.
If you want to read a transcript of this conversation,
you can find one, as always, on our website,
eye-on.ai.
That's eye-on.ai.
In the meantime, remember the Singularity
may not be near, but AI is already changing
our worlds, so pay attention.